# VLM Painter

Here are the general rules that I want you to work with in [AGENTS.md](./AGENTS.md), these are my taste and general instructions while working on a project

This is a research project on which I am working on currently for training a vision language model (VLM) like [Qwen/Qwen3.5-0.8B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3.5-0.8B) to paint and teach it using RL(e.g GRPO). There are also two papers which are related to this in the `papers` dir which you can refer and take inspiration from. One of the papers of [PaintTransformer](papers/paint_transformer/paint_transformer.md) also has the source code available at [PaintTransformer](PaintTransformer) which we can use for things like stroke images and the rendering patterns, the rasterizer, etc. You can also use any of the skills that are available to you for this project. All skills are available in the current dir under `~/.claude/skills` or under `./.claude/skills`. The model card for Qwen/Qwen3.5-0.8B is also available at `./qwen3.5_model_card.md`

This is the plan that I have in mind for this project
1. Deciding the prompt format: This phase involves just experimenting with the right image sizes (ideally 256 * 256 should be better), the correct prompt and the structure in which the stroke parameters will the generated by the VLM, which stroke parameters to include (x, y position, rotation, scaling, RGB color) and how to format them so that the VLM can easily generate them and that too with flexibility and diversity, this requires a bit of experimentation and ablations over different prompt structure and manually inspecting the outputs to see that they are diveristy and show some form of correct prompt generation structure. You see RL only works when the model shows some behaviour of that property in the first place, there should be some behaviour of that property like 20% in Pass@k etc. For this you can start a [server](serve_qwen35vl.py) for inference, I have tested the scripts actually works
2. After we have decided on this we can now do a little bit of SFT for the model first so that it always generates with the correct format and see the diversity also of the strokes by rendering the strokes and visually inspecting them. If SFT fails to give good results that means something is wrong either in step 1 or 2 and needs to get that right first
3. This step involves actually training the model with GRPO with a reward that makes the model generate strokes (paintings) that are as close to the original image as possible. This requires some good reward modelling such that the model does not collapse during training and continues monitoring that wether the model is training in the correct direction or not and if the model is see to be collapsed then halt the training, fix the things like reward function or the trianing script and start again. Let's use the [celebA](https://huggingface.co/datasets/nielsr/CelebA-faces) dataset

I already have created `.env` file which contains by huggingface tokens and wandb tokens, use wandb for logging everything and keep track of the training runs so that I can also view them and evaluate the progress. Use wandb with --env-file .env at the top of the python scripts. Also log rendered or generated or painted images after some interval of training so that I can also visually inspect how the training is going on and how the model is learning. If there is a `.gitignore` file make sure to ignore large directories like training checkpoints, datasets and other artifacts from my git repo, only commit actual code and things that are lightweight

I want you to take full ownership over this project and complete and do all the tasks that are metioned end to end
Work like an anthropic ML engineer/ML scientist/ML Researcher on this task and make sure this gets to completion with successfull results